feat(channels): add DingTalk interactive cards (#6930)
QwenLM/qwen-code: docs/design/2026-07-15-dingtalk-interactive-cards.md

## DingTalk-local implementation

Only the DingTalk adapter reads `interactiveCards` and registers the card callback topic. Its implementation is split into shared transport plus two state machines.

### Shared card client and callback router

The shared card client owns DingTalk authentication and card create/update operations. Template IDs remain private constants in the DingTalk package.

The callback router validates the action owner, card identity, session, and run generation before dispatch. Repeated, stale, and foreign-user actions are rejected without changing state. It reuses the existing Stream transport while adding handling for the card callback topic.

### Status-card state machine

The status-card state machine consumes existing task lifecycle events:

```text
running <-> waiting_input -> completed | failed | stopped
```

Updates are serialized per session and streaming changes are throttled so fire-and-forget lifecycle delivery cannot reorder card mutations.

> A Stop callback carries enough identity to address one exact run. After owner and generation validation, it reuses active prompt cancellation. A stale card therefore cannot stop a newer run in the same conversation.

Reviewer: **[Critical]** The exact-run guarantee is not enforceable through the proposed cancellation boundary. `requestActivePromptCancellation(sessionId)` re-reads whatever prompt is active at invocation time and even falls back to `bridge.cancelSession(sessionId)` when none is tracked. Adapter-side generation validation is therefore separated from the actual cancellation: a stale callback can validate its old card, race with the next prompt starting in the same session, and cancel that newer run.

Please make the run identity authoritative in `ChannelBase`, so cancellation atomically checks an expected run token against the current `ActivePrompt` and rejects absent or mismatched runs without using the session-only fallback.

```suggestion
A Stop callback carries an opaque run identity. `ChannelBase` atomically validates that identity against the current active prompt before cancellation; absent, stale, and mismatched runs are rejected without falling back to session-only cancellation. A stale card therefore cannot stop a newer run in the same conversation.
```

_— GPT-5 via Qwen Code /review_

Author: Agreed—this is a real race at the cancellation boundary. The intended contract is now called out explicitly in the PR description: the Stop action carries an opaque run identity, and `ChannelBase` must atomically compare it with the current active prompt before cancelling. Missing, stale, or mismatched identities are rejected without the session-only fallback. I’m keeping this thread unresolved because the committed design document has not been updated yet; this PR remains a design-only Draft.

### Question-card state machine

The question-card state machine is entered through the channel-neutral presentation hook:

```text
pending -> submitted | cancelled | expired | externally_resolved | presentation_failed
```

Submitting maps card fields back to the semantic answer keys and responds to the original permission request. Cancelling or expiring responds with cancellation. An abort signal closes the card if the host resolves or destroys the request first.

> While a question is pending, the status card moves from `running` to `waiting_input`. Successful submission returns it to `running`; cancellation, expiration, or task termination moves it to the corresponding terminal state.

Reviewer: **[Critical]** This transition assumes at most one pending question. `ChannelBase` explicitly supports multiple simultaneous permission requests for the same session/chat, so submitting one card can return the status card to `running` while another question still blocks the run.

Track pending question request IDs per run and derive `waiting_input` from the whole set/count; leave that state only after the last request resolves, with terminal task lifecycle events taking precedence.

```suggestion
While one or more questions are pending, the status card is `waiting_input`. Each request is tracked by request ID; successful submission returns the card to `running` only after the final pending question resolves. Cancellation, expiration, or task termination moves it to the corresponding terminal state, and terminal task lifecycle events take precedence.
```

_— GPT-5 via Qwen Code /review_

Author: Agreed. The intended model is a per-run set of pending question request IDs, not a single pending flag. The status card stays `waiting_input` while that set is non-empty, returns to `running` only after the final request resolves, and terminal lifecycle states always take precedence. I’ve recorded this accepted constraint in the PR description, but I’m keeping the thread unresolved until the committed design document is updated.

## Existing capabilities reused

- `ask_user_question` already describes questions, options, multi-select behavior, and returns answers through the original tool invocation.
- ACP permission metadata already identifies a user-question interaction and preserves its questions.
- Channel session routing already delivers a permission request only to the adapter that owns the session.
- Pending permission requests already have a request identity and response path.
- Task lifecycle events already expose start, streaming, tool, and terminal updates to channel adapters.
- Active prompt cancellation already provides the same cancellation path used by `/cancel`.
- DingTalk already has a Stream connection and generic callback ingress.
- CLI and IDE surfaces already render `ask_user_question` natively.

## Channel-neutral extension

`ChannelBase` gains one presentation seam for semantic user-input requests:

```ts
protected presentUserInputRequest(
  context: ChannelUserInputRequestContext,
): Promise<
  | { kind: 'presented' }
  | { kind: 'handled' }
  | { kind: 'unsupported' }

> >;

Author: Addressed in `feb965bb0`. The design now includes the context shape, responder signature, settlement reasons, and dispatch pseudocode. The pending permission and settlement controller are stored before presentation; `presented` keeps it pending, `handled` removes it and returns, and `unsupported` falls through to the existing formatter and sender. Permission commands, direct response, daemon resolution, timeout, cleanup, cancellation, and bridge replacement all settle exactly once.

```

> The context contains normalized questions, the routed target, session and request identities, an abort signal, and a one-shot responder for either submitted answers or cancellation. It contains no card template ID, DingTalk action ID, or DingTalk callback payload.

Author: Addressed in `feb965bb0`. The design now provides a minimal `ChannelUserInputRequestContext` sketch with `requestId`, `sessionId`, `runId`, `target`, `ownerId`, the semantic request, a cause-aware settlement signal, and `respond(response): Promise<boolean>`. DingTalk template and callback fields remain outside the shared contract.

- `presented` means the adapter created an interactive surface and the permission remains pending until the responder is called.
- `handled` means the adapter already completed a channel-local fallback and resolved or cancelled the request, so the base does nothing further.
- `unsupported` means the adapter does not implement semantic user-input presentation, so the base preserves the existing permission message and command behavior.

The default implementation returns `unsupported`. This is intentionally compatibility-preserving: adapters other than DingTalk are not opted into a new cancellation or text-handoff policy. The existing permission formatter does not serialize the raw ACP input, so those clients do not display question JSON today.

## DingTalk-local implementation

Only the DingTalk adapter reads `interactiveCards` and registers the card callback topic. Its implementation is split into shared transport plus two state machines.

### Shared card client and callback router

The shared card client owns DingTalk authentication and card create/update operations. Template IDs remain private constants in the DingTalk package.

> The callback router validates the action owner, card identity, session, and run generation before dispatch. Repeated, stale, and foreign-user actions are rejected without changing state. It reuses the existing Stream transport while adding handling for the card callback topic.

Reviewer 2: **[Suggestion]** "Validates the action owner" / "foreign-user actions are rejected" is asserted but the owner identity is never defined, and the existing shared-session authorization (`isAuthorizedForSharedSession`) is permissive by design. — Failure scenario: in a group chat with a shared session (`sessionScope: 'thread'`), user A's `ask_user_question` posts a card every member can see and click; if the card router reuses the existing shared-session auth (the path of least resistance), user B's click answers A's question or hits A's Stop — a non-owner acts on someone else's run, while `/approve` and the card end up with contradictory authorization for the same request. Bind card-action authorization explicitly to the request originator (match the callback's `senderStaffId`/`senderId` against the run owner) and state that card actions are owner-only regardless of `sessionScope`, reconciled with the `/approve` shared-session policy.

_— qwen-latest-series-invite-beta-v77 via Qwen Code /review_

Author: Addressed in `feb965bb0`. Card actions are explicitly owner-only and do not reuse shared-session authorization. Card creation stores a typed owner key based on the DingTalk identity already normalized from `senderStaffId` with `senderId` fallback; callback dispatch normalizes the action user into the same identity domain and requires an exact match. Missing or foreign identities fail closed without mutating the run, request, or card.

> The callback router validates the action owner, card identity, session, and run generation before dispatch. Repeated, stale, and foreign-user actions are rejected without changing state. It reuses the existing Stream transport while adding handling for the card callback topic.

Author: Addressed in `feb965bb0`. Card actions are explicitly owner-only and do not reuse shared-session authorization. Card creation stores a typed owner key based on the DingTalk identity already normalized from `senderStaffId` with `senderId` fallback; callback dispatch normalizes the action user into the same identity domain and requires an exact match. Missing or foreign identities fail closed without mutating the run, request, or card.

> The DingTalk override owns both of its outcomes. If a question card is created, it returns `presented`. If question cards are disabled or card creation fails, DingTalk sends readable semantic Markdown, cancels the current question request, and returns `handled`. This is a text handoff, not a second form protocol: the user is told that interactive input is unavailable and the next normal message continues in the same session. `/approve` is not used for this fallback because it cannot carry answer values.

Author: Partially accepted and documented in `feb965bb0`. The initial design intentionally does not add a background retry queue. A creation failure produces a clear semantic Markdown handoff, cancels the current question, tells the user it can be retried, returns `handled`, and records a structured error. Automatic retry can be evaluated separately if observed failure rates justify the scheduling and persistence cost.

### Status-card state machine

The status-card state machine consumes existing task lifecycle events:

```text

> running <-> waiting_input -> completed | failed | stopped

Reviewer 2: **[Suggestion]** The status-card diagram only allows `running <-> waiting_input`, with terminal states reachable solely from `waiting_input` — there is no `running -> completed | failed | stopped` edge. — Failure scenario: an ordinary turn that never asks a question completes/fails/is stopped while the card is in `running`; implemented literally from this diagram, the terminal lifecycle event has no edge to apply and the status card is stuck on "running" after every ordinary completion (the common case). Add `running -> {completed, failed, stopped}` edges so terminal states are reachable from both `running` and `waiting_input`.

_— qwen-latest-series-invite-beta-v77 via Qwen Code /review_

Author: Addressed in `feb965bb0`. The core lifecycle remains `cancelled`; no `stopped` event is introduced. A `cancel_command` cancellation may be presented as “Stopped” only in DingTalk. Completed, failed, and cancelled are now reachable from both `running` and `waiting_input`.

> running <-> waiting_input -> completed | failed | stopped

Author: Addressed in `feb965bb0`. The core lifecycle remains `cancelled`; no `stopped` event is introduced. A `cancel_command` cancellation may be presented as “Stopped” only in DingTalk. Completed, failed, and cancelled are now reachable from both `running` and `waiting_input`.

```

Updates are serialized per session and streaming changes are throttled so fire-and-forget lifecycle delivery cannot reorder card mutations.

> A Stop callback carries enough identity to address one exact run. After owner and generation validation, it reuses active prompt cancellation. A stale card therefore cannot stop a newer run in the same conversation.

Author: Addressed in `feb965bb0`. The undefined generation is replaced by an opaque ID generated for every prompt invocation and stored on the active prompt. A card Stop passes the expected run ID into a card-bound cancellation entry point that atomically compares it with the current active prompt; missing, stale, and mismatched IDs return `false` without the session-only fallback. Existing `/cancel` remains unchanged.

### Question-card state machine

The question-card state machine is entered through the channel-neutral presentation hook:

```text

> pending -> submitted | cancelled | expired | externally_resolved | presentation_failed

Author: Addressed in `feb965bb0` by removing the persistent `presentation_failed` state. Creation failure now has one explicit `handled` path: send a readable semantic Markdown handoff, cancel the original question, tell the user it can be retried, and record a structured template-aware error.

```

> Submitting maps card fields back to the semantic answer keys and responds to the original permission request. Cancelling or expiring responds with cancellation. An abort signal closes the card if the host resolves or destroys the request first.

Reviewer 2: **[Suggestion]** A single abort signal is overloaded for two opposite causes — "another surface answered" (resolve) and "the host destroyed the request" (Stop / `/cancel` / failure / expiry) — but the only abort-driven transition defined is `externally_resolved`. — Failure scenario: the user clicks the new Stop action while a question card is pending; the permission request is destroyed, the abort fires, and the question card moves to `externally_resolved` ("answered on another surface") even though nothing answered it — contradicting the status card's `stopped` terminal for the same run. Carry the abort cause in the context (resolved-elsewhere vs destroyed) and map host-destroy to `cancelled`/`stopped`, reserving `externally_resolved` for a genuine cross-surface answer. (Relatedly, the status-card transition table should also map a genuine `externally_resolved` back to `running`, since the run resumes.)

_— qwen-latest-series-invite-beta-v77 via Qwen Code /review_

Author: Addressed in `feb965bb0`. Settlement now carries an explicit reason: `answered_elsewhere`, `request_cancelled`, `run_cancelled`, or `expired`. Only a genuine cross-surface answer maps to `externally_resolved`; request/run destruction maps to cancelled or Stopped presentation. When the final externally resolved question leaves the pending set, an active run returns to `running`.

> Submitting maps card fields back to the semantic answer keys and responds to the original permission request. Cancelling or expiring responds with cancellation. An abort signal closes the card if the host resolves or destroys the request first.

Author: Addressed in `feb965bb0`. The callback atomically claims the pending record and invokes the original responder before displaying success. `true` maps to `submitted`; `false` maps to the local `externally_resolved` state and a disabled “Handled in another client” projection. The card never shows successful submission before the responder accepts the answer.

Permission resolution remains first-responder-wins. If a native Web or IDE surface attached to the same daemon session answers first, the permission abort signal moves the DingTalk card to `externally_resolved` and disables its actions. If DingTalk answers first, the native surface receives the same resolution and closes. No second answer is accepted.

While a question is pending, the status card moves from `running` to `waiting_input`. Successful submission returns it to `running`; cancellation, expiration, or task termination moves it to the corresponding terminal state.

## Configuration

The configuration is local to the DingTalk channel:

```json
{
  "interactiveCards": {
    "enabled": true,
    "statusCard": {
      "enabled": true
    },
    "questionCard": {
      "enabled": true,
      "timeoutMs": 300000
    }
  }
}
```

All capabilities are enabled by default. The question-card lifetime is configurable but cannot outlive the upstream permission request, so the effective timeout is the smaller of the configured timeout and the host permission lifetime.

> The initial implementation uses the existing template IDs from `soimy/openclaw-channel-dingtalk` as DingTalk-internal constants:

Reviewer 2: **[Suggestion]** These template IDs are taken from a third-party project (`soimy/openclaw-channel-dingtalk`), but DingTalk interactive-card templates are scoped to the DingTalk app (AppKey/AppSecret) that registered them, so they are unlikely to resolve under Qwen Code's own DingTalk app credentials. — Failure scenario: on the first `ask_user_question`, card creation fails (template not found/authorized) and, per the degradation table, the design silently renders Markdown and cancels the question — so 100% of questions become "your question was cancelled, please retype," the headline feature is non-functional out of the box, and the silent fallback hides a total failure rate. Confirm the templates are registered to Qwen Code's DingTalk app (or recreate them under it), validate the configured template IDs resolve under the active credentials at startup, and treat a template/config error as a loud, observable fault rather than the silent cancel-and-retype fallback.

_— qwen-latest-series-invite-beta-v77 via Qwen Code /review_

Author: I am not adopting user-supplied template configuration or a startup health check. The built-in status template is `675cde2f-f526-40cb-b828-f5b2b57b8b77.schema`, and the built-in question template is `c2a6355b-9724-4f7e-9653-d33fcb3311bb.schema`. [#583](https://github.com/soimy/openclaw-channel-dingtalk/pull/583) is merged and records real-device delivery, submit callback, cancel callback, and task-continuation verification. [#585](https://github.com/soimy/openclaw-channel-dingtalk/pull/585) is merged, ships the final template asset, and was approved by the maintainer. First-use OpenAPI failures are now explicitly structured, template-aware, and routed through the documented fallback rather than being silent.

> The initial implementation uses the existing template IDs from `soimy/openclaw-channel-dingtalk` as DingTalk-internal constants:

Author: I am not adopting user-supplied template configuration or a startup health check. The built-in status template is `675cde2f-f526-40cb-b828-f5b2b57b8b77.schema`, and the built-in question template is `c2a6355b-9724-4f7e-9653-d33fcb3311bb.schema`. [#583](https://github.com/soimy/openclaw-channel-dingtalk/pull/583) is merged and records real-device delivery, submit callback, cancel callback, and task-continuation verification. [#585](https://github.com/soimy/openclaw-channel-dingtalk/pull/585) is merged, ships the final template asset, and was approved by the maintainer. First-use OpenAPI failures are now explicitly structured, template-aware, and routed through the documented fallback rather than being silent.

- `packages/channels/base/src/ChannelAgentBridge.ts` includes the permission outcome on `PermissionResolvedEvent`. `packages/channels/base/src/AcpBridge.ts` emits that event synchronously before a successful responder returns, while `packages/channels/base/src/DaemonChannelBridge.ts` retains a responded-request mapping and can emit the event later.
- `packages/core/src/tools/askUserQuestion.ts` permits one to four questions. `packages/acp-bridge/src/bridgeClient.ts` derives each question's `answerKey` from its array index, and the ACP session consumes a separate `answers` object in addition to the permission outcome.
- The generic permission commands submit an option or cancellation outcome, not structured answers. When more than one request is pending, the existing ambiguity response already lists request IDs and titles, so the design does not add another card field only for command disambiguation.

## Channel-neutral user-input seam

`ChannelBase` gains one semantic presentation hook with three explicit outcomes:

```ts
type UserInputPresentationResult =
  | { kind: 'presented' }
  | { kind: 'handled' }
  | { kind: 'unsupported' };

> type UserInputSettlementReason =

Reviewer 2: **[Suggestion]** The union does not type-check the actual settlement channel because `AbortSignal.reason` is `any`. A misspelled reason can compile and bypass the consumer's projection switch. Route settlement through a typed helper/wrapper that accepts `UserInputSettlementReason` (or expose a typed callback) instead of making callers independently cast a bare abort reason.

_— Codex $qreview via Qwen Code /review_

};

interface ChannelUserInputRequestContext {
  requestId: string;
  sessionId: string;
  runId: string;
  target: SessionTarget;
  ownerId: string;
  request: PermissionRequestEvent['request'];
  settlementSignal: AbortSignal;
  respond(response: ChannelUserInputResponse): Promise<boolean>;
}

protected presentUserInputRequest(
  context: ChannelUserInputRequestContext,
): Promise<UserInputPresentationResult>;
```

`settlementSignal.reason` contains a `UserInputSettlementReason`. The context contains no template ID, action ID, or DingTalk callback payload.

The hook is inserted after the pending permission and its settlement controller are stored, but before the existing permission formatter and sender:

```text
store PendingPermission + settlement controller
active = current Channel-owned ActivePrompt for event.sessionId
if request is ask_user_question and active has runId + ownerId:
  construct context from active
  result = presentUserInputRequest(context)
  presented   -> mark structured input as presented, keep pending, and return
  handled     -> remove pending and return
  unsupported -> continue
format and send the existing permission message
```

> Every path that removes a pending permission settles the controller exactly once. This includes permission commands, a direct responder call, daemon `permissionResolved`, timeout, session cleanup, task cancellation, and bridge replacement. `ChannelBase` classifies an independent `permissionResolved` from its `outcome` before removing the pending request: `cancelled`, or a selected option whose original permission option is `reject_once`, becomes `request_cancelled`; any other or missing outcome becomes the neutral `resolved_outside_card`. This classification does not guess which client responded.

Reviewer 2: **[Suggestion]** The settlement-reason enum defines `run_cancelled` and `expired`, and the question-card table projects distinct messages for "Request or run destroyed" (Cancelled/Stopped) and "Timeout" (Expired). But this classification rule maps a `cancelled` outcome to `request_cancelled`, and a run Stop or host timeout *also* surfaces as a `permissionResolved` with `{ outcome: 'cancelled' }` — the bridge collapses richer reasons (`DaemonChannelBridge.parsePermissionOutcome` emits only `cancelled`/`selected`; `AcpBridge`'s timeout and `resolvePendingPermissions` both resolve pending with `{ outcome: 'cancelled' }`).

Concrete cost: an implementer following this rule classifies run-cancellations and timeouts as `request_cancelled` → "Cancelled outside this card", so the question card contradicts the status card's "Stopped", and `run_cancelled`/`expired` are never produced. The doc says these causes "take precedence", but the rule as written doesn't say they bypass outcome classification. Suggest clarifying, e.g.:

> A run cancellation, session cleanup, or card timeout settles the controller with `run_cancelled` / `expired` directly (these take precedence over the bridge's collapsed `cancelled` outcome); the outcome-classification rule applies only to settlements that arrive without such a local cause.

_— qwen-latest-series-invite-beta-v77 via Qwen Code /review_

> The hook is only eligible for the current Channel-owned `ActivePrompt`. When no such prompt, `runId`, or owner exists, `ChannelBase` does not construct the context or invoke the hook; it treats presentation as `unsupported` and continues the existing permission path. A run started by CLI, Web, IDE, SDK, or another client therefore creates neither DingTalk card. The initial design does not add cross-client run ownership or identity federation.

Reviewer 2: **[Critical]** `Channel-owned ActivePrompt` also includes loop and webhook producers. Those unattended runs emit normal lifecycle events and may carry synthetic owners such as `webhook:github-ci`; if one presents an `ask_user_question` card, no DingTalk user can satisfy the owner check and the disabled legacy commands leave the run blocked until timeout. Define eligibility as an inbound human-owned DingTalk turn and explicitly exclude `loopPrompt` and webhook tasks unless a separate unattended-card contract is designed.

_— Codex $qreview via Qwen Code /review_

The default hook returns `unsupported`. Other IM adapters therefore retain their current permission formatting and commands.

## Exact-run identity and cancellation

> Every prompt invocation creates an opaque unique `runId` and stores it on the corresponding `ActivePrompt`. It is not the daemon lifecycle generation, which changes for session lifecycle operations rather than every prompt.

Reviewer 2: **[Critical]** The `runId` is stored only on private `ActivePrompt` state, while DingTalk creates status UI from lifecycle/prompt hooks whose current contracts expose neither that token nor the owner. A literal implementation therefore cannot key the registry or embed the exact token checked by `ChannelBase`: `sessionId` aliases consecutive runs, and an adapter-local ID never matches. Add a shared prompt-lifecycle context carrying the Channel-generated `runId` and typed owner, emit the same value through start/chunk/terminal events, and use it in the card registry, callback payload, question context, and exact-run cancellation.

_— Codex $qreview via Qwen Code /review_

## Owner-only card actions

Card-action authorization is stricter than shared-session message authorization. Stop, submit, and cancel are always owner-only regardless of `sessionScope`.

At inbound-message time, DingTalk already prefers `senderStaffId` and falls back to `senderId` for the envelope sender. Card creation stores a typed owner key in the same identity domain. The callback router normalizes the callback's `userId`, `senderStaffId`, or `senderId` into a comparable typed key and requires an exact match. If no comparable identity is available, the action fails closed.

A foreign-user callback is acknowledged and logged but cannot mutate a run, permission request, or card.

## DingTalk-local implementation

Only the DingTalk adapter reads `interactiveCards` and registers the card callback topic. It owns:

- A shared authenticated Card OpenAPI client.
- A status-card registry keyed by `runId` and `outTrackId`.
- A question-card registry keyed by `requestId` and `outTrackId`.
- An owner-validating callback router.
- Per-card serialized update queues, transient in-flight claims, and terminal tombstones.
- DingTalk-local fallback and structured error reporting.

> The status registry also keeps `pendingQuestionRequestIds: Set<string>` for each run. The question registry does not supersede an older request merely because a newer request exists in the same session.

Reviewer 2: **[Suggestion]** Controller settlement is an explicit invariant ("every path that removes a pending permission settles the controller exactly once"), but the parallel `pendingQuestionRequestIds` maintenance is left implicit — even though the doc stresses the two registries are independent.

Concrete cost: an implementer can correctly project a question card to a terminal state yet forget to remove its `requestId` from the run's set on a non-submit path (timeout, `resolved_outside_card`, throw). The set never empties, so the status card is stranded at `waiting_input` for an otherwise-active run. Suggest adding a parallel invariant, e.g.:

> Every question-settlement path (submit, cancel, `false`, throw, independent settlement, timeout, request/run destroyed) also removes the `requestId` from its run's `pendingQuestionRequestIds` and re-derives `waiting_input`; a terminal status card ignores further set mutations.

_— qwen-latest-series-invite-beta-v77 via Qwen Code /review_

## Streaming status-card lifecycle

The status card represents one Channel-owned run. Runs initiated by CLI, Web, IDE, SDK, or another client can still affect shared session state, but they do not create a DingTalk status card.

Creation and streaming follow DingTalk's streaming-card protocol:

1. Call `createAndDeliver` with a unique `outTrackId` and initial `flowStatus=2`.
2. Open streaming with an empty full update using `isFull=true`, `isFinalize=false`, and `isError=false`.

> 3. Send high-frequency model output through `/card/streaming`.

Reviewer 2: **[Suggestion]** Raw model chunks can arrive faster than `/card/streaming` completes, but the serialized queue has no throttling, coalescing, backpressure, or bound. A long response can therefore grow memory and delay terminal finalization behind one request per chunk. Specify an at-most-one-in-flight writer with a bounded coalescing buffer, capped flush cadence/size, and an overflow/degradation path; fold pending text into the terminal update instead of draining every original chunk.

_— Codex $qreview via Qwen Code /review_

The question card represents one permission request containing the request's complete question array. The tool schema allows one to four questions, and the existing bridge derives each question's `answerKey` from its array index. One card therefore renders and submits the full set; there is no per-question registry or card lifecycle. It is created with `card_status=pending` and does not call `/card/streaming`. All presentation changes use `/card/instances` with `updateCardDataByKey=true`.

Each pending record contains:

- `requestId`, `outTrackId`, and `runId`.
- The complete ordered question set and its answer keys.
- The typed owner identity.
- The original one-shot responder.
- Timeout and settlement subscriptions.
- The local state and a terminal tombstone.

The callback order is authoritative:

1. Locate the record by `outTrackId` and correlate the request and run.
2. Parse the submit or cancel payload without changing the record.
3. Validate the action owner.
4. Synchronously claim the current live record before the first asynchronous operation.
5. Call the original responder.
6. If the same record is still current and non-terminal, update the card from the responder result.

> 7. Acknowledge the callback.

Reviewer 2: **[Critical]** This order leaves the DingTalk transport acknowledgment pending across both the permission responder and a Card OpenAPI update. If either await is slow or hangs, DingTalk can retry or report delivery failure after the local record is claimed or the permission has already settled. Acknowledge immediately after parsing, correlation, owner validation, and the synchronous claim—before the first external await—and reserve semantic success/failure for the card projection.

_— Codex $qreview via Qwen Code /review_

- [soimy/openclaw-channel-dingtalk#583](https://github.com/soimy/openclaw-channel-dingtalk/pull/583) is merged and records real-device card delivery, submit callback, cancel callback, and task-continuation verification.
- [soimy/openclaw-channel-dingtalk#585](https://github.com/soimy/openclaw-channel-dingtalk/pull/585) is merged, ships the final question-card template asset, and was approved by the maintainer.

These PRs provide Card OpenAPI and template evidence. Qwen Code does not copy their synthetic-message reinjection or single-question supersede semantics.

## Degradation behavior

The initial design does not add a background retry queue and does not retain a persistent `presentation_failed` state.

| Situation                                     | Behavior                                                                                                                                                                      |
| --------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | Status card disabled or creation/update fails | Continue the same turn with existing Markdown delivery and record a structured card error.                                                                                    |

Reviewer 2: **[Critical]** The promised fallback has no compatible awaited delivery seam. Today `ChannelBase` awaits Markdown/block-stream delivery before emitting `completed`, while `onTaskLifecycle` is fire-and-forget. Keeping that delivery duplicates successful card output; suppressing it means a terminal card-write failure occurs after the last awaited delivery point, too late to provide the promised fallback consistently. Add a card-aware awaited terminal-delivery hook that performs the final card write, falls back to Markdown, and completes only after one path succeeds; define the corresponding block-streaming behavior as well.

_— Codex $qreview via Qwen Code /review_

| Question responder throws                     | Remove the pending record, finish the claimed record as cancelled, retain a tombstone, project non-success immediately, and do not advertise callback retry.                  |
| Another path resolves first                   | When no local responder claim is in flight, classify the settlement outcome as cancelled/denied or `resolved_outside_card` and use a neutral projection.                      |
| Request/run is destroyed                      | Settle as request/run cancellation; project the card as cancelled or Stopped.                                                                                                 |
| Another IM adapter owns the session           | Return `unsupported` and preserve its existing permission message and commands.                                                                                               |
| Ordinary permission                           | Keep `/approve`, `/approve-always`, and `/deny` unchanged; it does not affect the question-only `waiting_input` presentation state.                                           |

> For a card-presented question, `/approve`, `/approve-always`, and `/deny` remain recognized commands but do not call the responder; they instruct the user to submit or cancel through the card. The card is the only DingTalk-local settlement surface for that presented request. This is required because the existing permission commands supply only an option ID or cancellation outcome, while a question submission consumes a separate `answers` object. Other permissions and adapters keep their current command behavior. The initial design does not promise automatic callback retry.

Reviewer 2: **[Critical]** The structured-answer limitation applies to approval, but not to denial: `ChannelBase.denialResponse()` already produces a complete reject/cancel outcome without an `answers` object. If the card is visible but its callback delivery is broken, blocking `/deny` removes the only working settlement path and leaves the run pending until timeout. Preserve an owner-authorized `/deny` path through the one-shot responder and restrict only approval commands that cannot supply the required answers.

_— Codex $qreview via Qwen Code /review_

The existing limitation remains explicit: `/approve` cannot carry `ask_user_question` answers. This proposal does not silently cancel questions or expose raw request JSON on other IM adapters.

## Chapter 3: Future extension blueprint

![Future extension blueprint for other IM adapters](./assets/dingtalk-interactive-cards-other-im-extension.png)

A future IM adapter may explicitly override the semantic hook for a request tied to its own current `ActivePrompt`. An adapter returning `presented` must own its platform presentation, callback or structured-reply parser, pending registry, owner and run checks, timeout, cause-aware settlement, idempotency, and direct response to the original request. It must not inject a synthetic user message merely to resume the run.

Each adapter should opt in through a separate change so its platform-specific capability and state ownership can be reviewed independently.

## Risks and scope boundaries

> The first implementation is intentionally daemon-local. Pending-card registries and tombstones are tied to the process lifetime; restart-safe recovery and non-sticky multi-instance callback routing require a separate persistence design.

Reviewer 2: **[Suggestion]** Terminal tombstones have no TTL, capacity bound, compaction, or reclamation rule, so a literal process-lifetime implementation retains history proportional to all completed cards. Define a callback-redelivery retention window plus a capped LRU/size bound, and compact terminal records after clearing timers, subscriptions, responder references, question payloads, and queued content.

_— Codex $qreview via Qwen Code /review_
